# Conclusion

The purpose of this thesis was to analyse existing educational products from both gaming and non-gaming backgrounds and draw from their expertise whilst creating an educational turn-based RPG of our own. We took inspiration from a number of different educational products as well as two existing videogames from the chosen genre and specified requirements for our game. In subsequent chapters, we have discussed the design choices behind the game's exploration and battle systems, whose key mechanics were borrowed primarily from Dofus. We have discussed in detail various types of quests that can be implemented in the game and the need to include variability in the quest system, as well as item types present in the game and their place within the game economy.

As part of the thesis, we have built a prototype of the game featuring one in-game area. We subsequently created a tutorial system to help the player take their first steps within the game world and tested the prototype on three individuals. The testing phase helped in revealing many bugs, game design and user experience issues, which have been detailed in the corresponding section. Lastly, we shared a number of ways on how to improve the game.

Overall, I am pleased with the result, although the game still has a long way to go in terms of both level design and bug fixes. I am working with the team behind Defold game engine in fixing the critical bugs mentioned in the testing section. The research has given me valuable insight in creative processes involved in game design as well as software architecture in general.
